---
title: "Down the rabbit hole with tidy eval — Part 1"

post_date: 2017-07-13
layout: single
permalink: /tidyeval-1/
categories : r-blog-en
tags: [tidyverse, tidyeval]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Some random explanations about programming with tidy eval. 

<!--more-->

## What on earth is evaluation?

So, let's start with a simple question: what is evaluation? Evaluation is the process of analyzing an expression, in order to give the user something back. For example, in R, the standard evaluations is : 

+ you type/send something to the console (called a symbol)
+ press enter
+ R does some magic stuffs
+ R returns you the value associated with the expression

For example : 

```r
# You type 1, the expression
1
# R evaluates 1, and returns you 
[1] 1

a <- 1
# Here, the expression is a (a is the symbol)
# Standard eval: when a symbol is evaluated, it return its value
a 
[1] 1
```

Pretty clear isn't it? 

Spoiler: the part about R doing magic stuffs wasn't quite true. In fact, R takes the symbol you've entered (here `a`), turns it into and internal representation, then looks in the __direct environment__ of the expression in order to __return the value__ associated with it. If R doesn't find the value in the environment the expression is linked to, it goes up to the parent env, then to the parent env, so on and so forth.

This is R standard evaluation. The returned object is the value the symbol is linked to. Keep this in mind, you'll need this later.

## Aside: about lazy evalution 

An R strength is _lazy evaluation_. These strange words mean that R only evaluates the expression if the expression is actually used. That's why this kind of function works: 

```r
lazy <- function(a, b){
  print("please take a nap")
}
lazy()
[1] "please take a nap"

lazy <- function(a, b){
  print(a)
}
lazy("please take a nap")
[1] "please take a nap"
```

Here in function 1, `a` and `b` are not evaluated in the environment of the function, so no error. In function 2, `b` is never called, so it's not evaluated, and no error is thrown either. On the other hand, this doesn't work: 

```r
lazy <- function(a, b){
  print(a)
  print(b)
}
lazy("please take a nap")
[1] "please take a nap"
Error in print(b) : 
  argument "b" is missing, with no default
```

Here, you can see that it throws an error: `b` is needed. You can also notice that `a` is first evaluated, the strings are printed, and only then the missing `b` throws an error. 

## About scoping 

Quick thing to keep in mind here, the notion of environment. Each expression is by default evaluated in its environment. Then if it's missing, R goes up to its parent env, then to the parent env, etc. 

__Each function defines its own environment__, which can have its own rules (so basically its own rule for evaluation of a symbol). The env opened when the function is launched and closed when finished. That's why you can't directly access the object created inside a function : 

```r
create <- function(){
  a <- 1
}

create()
a
> Error: could not find 'a'

# Special character to override this  

create <- function(){
  a <<- 1
}
create()
a
[1] 1

# But please DON'T do that. 
```

## Let's focus: what about tidy eval? 

So, back to our original point. I've been diving into tidy eval lately as I've been contributing to [{narnia}](https://github.com/njtierney/narnia), a package designed to analyse missing data, the tidy way. The whole philosophy of the package being the tidyverse, I needed to contribute with the same philosophy in mind. 

So basically, I needed to create a function that took a `df`, the unquoted name `x` of a column, and `dplyr::group_by` with this column, and then `ggplot::ggplot`, with `aes(x)`, the name of the column previously specified. Thing is, you can't simply do : 

```r
# Note : this is obviously not the function I was working on. This is an example.
# 
# So you want to turn this into a function : 
library(tidyverse)
iris %>% 
  group_by(Species) %>% 
  slice(5:10) %>% 
  ggplot(aes(Species, Sepal.Length)) + 
  geom_point() 

# Let's try the simple way

gg_top <- function(df, col_group, col_plot){
  df %>%
    group_by(col_group) %>% 
    slice(5:10) %>% 
    ggplot(aes(col_group, col_plot)) + 
    geom_point()  
}

gg_top(df = iris, col_group = Species, col_plot = Sepal.Length)

Error in grouped_df_impl(data, unname(vars), drop) : 
  Column `col_group` is unknown
```

OK. Here R simply can't find `col_group`. But where is this coming from? I did specified that `col_group` was equal to `Species`. Why is it looking for `col`?

Let's try something else. 

```r
# This works 
select(iris, Species)

# So what if I want to reproduce it?
# I can think of 

select_custom <- function(df, col){
  df[, col]
}
select_custom(df = iris, col = Species)
> Error in `[.data.frame`(df, , col) : could not find 'Species' 

# But this works: 
select_custom(df = iris, col = "Species")
```

God damn, how is it that `dplyr::select` works with unquoted element, while `select_custom` needs a quoted string? That's because : 

+ `select_custom` uses the standard evaluation: R sees the symbol `Species`, and tries to evaluate the standard way — i.e. by looking in the environment of the function for the value of `Species`. It doesn't find it, so throws an error.
+ When `"Species"` is quoted, R evaluates it for what it is: a string. So R doesn't try to return a value from it.
+ `dplyr::select` creates an environment, which has a custom method of evaluation. This is why you can pass unquoted string there — R will not look computer the symbol looking for a value in the env. 

In each `dplyr::function(df, var)`, every `var` is evaluated in the environment of the function, which have special way of computed symbols. In the case of `filter`, R looks for a column named `var` in `df` (in practice, that's not exactly how it works, but you get the point). 

This explains the error being thrown earlier: `group_by` was looking for the `col_group` column inside our data.frame. 

## Getting started 

Then, the big question: how can we program with dplyr? How can we pass the unquoted `Species` arg from the function `gg_top` to our `group_by`, and `Sepal.Length` to the `ggplot`? Let's start by breaking our problem into two parts: the `dplyr`, then the `ggplot`. 

So first, we need to create a function that takes a data.frame, makes a `group_by` on a column, then returns the `slice(5:10)`. Basically something doing: 

```r
iris %>%
  group_by(Species) %>%
  slice(5:10)

# We could think of 
slicer <- function(df, var){
  df %>%
  group_by(var) %>%
  slice(5:10)
}
slicer(df = iris, var = Species)

> Error in grouped_df_impl(data, unname(vars), drop) : 
  Column `var` is unknown
```

Here, you can see that R is looking for a `var` column. That's because `var` is __evaluated in the environment created by `group_by`__, so looking for the column `var` in the `iris` df. So how to prevent that? 

We could think of: 

```r
slicer(df = iris, var = "Species")

> Error in grouped_df_impl(data, unname(vars), drop) : 
  Column `var` is unknown
```

But 1:  that's not working (because `group_by` doesn't take a string), 2: we don't want to quote.

So the thing is: `dplyr` functions work with a special type of objects, called `quosure` — this is how symbols are evaluated. You can create them with `quo()`. 

```r
quo(Species)
<quosure: global>
~Species

# So is this going to work? 
slicer <- function(df, var){
  df %>%
  group_by(quo(var)) %>%
  slice(5:10)
}
slicer(df = iris, var = Species)
Error in mutate_impl(.data, dots) : 
  Column `quo(var)` is of unsupported type quoted call
```

Nop! Obviously here, `group_by(quo(var))` compute `quo(var)` as a quosure, so it does: 

```r
quo(quo(var))
<quosure: frame>
~quo(var)
```

Not what we've been looking for either. We need a way to prevent the symbol `var` from being evaluated the standard way, but evaluated with tidy eval. Good news, there's a function for that — `enquo()`. This function : 
+ Takes a symbol 
+ quotes the R code supplied 
+ captures the environment 
+ returns a quosure

Then, we need a way to tell `group_by` that we've taken care to the "quosurisation" (that's not the real word, you know!). So... here comes `!!` (to be pronounced "Bang Bang" :) ) 

```r
slicer <- function(df, var){
  enquo_var <- enquo(var)
  df %>%
    # !! tells dplyr not to compute the object as a quosure
  group_by(!!enquo_var) %>%
  slice(5:10)
}
# That works!
slicer(df = iris, var = Species)
```

[emoji party]

## the ggplot part

So now, we need to pass the `col_group` and `col_plot` into the ggplot call. We may be tempted to pass `!!enquo_col_plot` the same way we passed it through `group_by`. Thing is: tidy eval is not yet implemented in `ggplot2` — so you can't pass the `enquo(var)` to it.  

```r
gg_top <- function(df, col_group, col_plot){
  enquo_col_group <- enquo(col_group)
  enquo_col_plot <- enquo(col_plot)
  df %>%
  group_by(!!enquo_col_group) %>%
    slice(5:10) %>% 
    ggplot(aes(!!enquo_col_group, !!enquo_col_plot)) + 
    geom_point()  
}

gg_top(df = iris, col_group = Species, col_plot = Sepal.Length)

Error in (function (x)  : could not find 'enquo_var' 

```

The trick is: you can use `quo_name`, which returns a character string with the name of the expression you've typed. Pass it to `ggplot2::aes_string`... and Voilà!

```r
gg_top <- function(df, col_group, col_plot){
  enquo_col_group <- enquo(col_group)
  enquo_col_plot <- enquo(col_plot)  
  df %>%
  group_by(!!enquo_col_group) %>%
    slice(5:10) %>% 
    ggplot(aes_string(quo_name(enquo_col_group), quo_name(enquo_col_plot))) + 
    geom_point()  
}

gg_top(df = iris, col_group = Species, col_plot = Sepal.Length)
```

[emoji party]^2 

Sorry, that was quite a long post.. I hope it has enlightened some dark side of the tidyverse :) 

Coming soon: more on tidy eval, environment, and computing on the R language. 
