---
title: "JavaScript cont in R"
post_date: 2019-09-23
layout: single
permalink: /js-const-r/
categories: r-blog-en
output: jekyllthat::jekylldown
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

One thing I like about JavaScript is the `const` declaration method,
which allows you to declare a variable one time, and that variable can’t
be reassigned after that. I.e, this piece of code will throw an error:

``` bash
node -e "const x = 12; x  = 14"
```

    ## [eval]:1
    ## const x = 12; x  = 14
    ##                  ^
    ## 
    ## TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.
    ##     at [eval]:1:18
    ##     at Script.runInThisContext (vm.js:124:20)
    ##     at Object.runInThisContext (vm.js:314:38)
    ##     at Object.<anonymous> ([eval]-wrapper:9:26)
    ##     at Module._compile (internal/modules/cjs/loader.js:805:30)
    ##     at evalScript (internal/process/execution.js:60:25)
    ##     at internal/main/eval_string.js:16:1

The cool thing about this is that you can’t override the variable by
mistake: once it’s set, it’s set. On the other hand, R allows you to
override almost any variable (well, except some reserved variables).

I asked Twitter if there was any implementation of that concept in R.
The use case, for example, would arise when you have a value that takes
some time to compute. If I do my computation, I can accidentally
override it later on. Event more if you’re using notebook, where you
create symbols and values all along your document.

``` r
a <- some_very_complex_computation()
# [...] Going on the weekend
a <- "Hello there!"
```

Here, I have no way to prevent myself from erasing the value in `a`. Of
course, there are always rigor, explicit variable name, and
not-assigning-things-without-thinking but you know how it is in the real
world, and there is no Cmd + Z there.

[Romain](https://twitter.com/romain_francois/status/1176092011084046336)
pointed out that `?lockBinding` existed, and that it was what I was
looking for. And that does.

Here’s how it works: it takes a character string referring to a symbol,
and an environment, and prevents from assigning any new value to this
symbol in the given environment.

``` r
x <- 12
lockBinding("x", .GlobalEnv)
x <- 13
```

    ## Error in eval(expr, envir, enclos): cannot change value of locked binding for 'x'

And here’s a small wrapper to do that:

``` r
lock <- function(x){
  lockBinding(
    deparse(
      substitute(x)), 
    env = parent.frame()
  )
}

plop <- 12
lock(plop)
plop <- 13
```

    ## Error in eval(expr, envir, enclos): cannot change value of locked binding for 'plop'

``` r
pouet <- function(){
  plop <- 14
  print(plop)
  lock(plop)
  plop <- 13
}
pouet()
```

    ## [1] 14

    ## Error in pouet(): cannot change value of locked binding for 'plop'

So there I could do

``` r
a <- some_very_complex_computation()
lock(a)
# [...] Going on the weekend
a <- "Hello there!"
```

And there, I have prevented myself from erasing my `a` variable. Of
course, it’s not the same as JavaScript `const`, as there is always a
way to unlock the
    symbol.

``` r
x <- 12
```

    ## Error in eval(expr, envir, enclos): cannot change value of locked binding for 'x'

``` r
lock(x)
x <- 13
```

    ## Error in eval(expr, envir, enclos): cannot change value of locked binding for 'x'

``` r
unlockBinding("x", .GlobalEnv)
x <- 13
x
```

    ## [1] 13

But I think it’s a rather elegant solution for preventing yourself from
unwanted variable overwriting.

See also:

  - [Make a Constant in R with Active
    Binding](https://iqis.netlify.com/post/2019/07/22/how-to-make-a-constant-in-r/)

Some answers to the Twitter thread also suggested using R6… but that
will be for another post :)
